
**URL:** https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4450094/

---

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know
Search
Log in

Primary site navigation

Search PMC Full-Text Archive
Search in PMC
Journal List 
User Guide
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.
Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2015 May 31.
Published in final edited form as: Neuron. 2012 Nov 8;76(3):470–485. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.021
THE MYSTERIOUS MOTIVATIONAL FUNCTIONS OF MESOLIMBIC DOPAMINE
John D Salamone 1, Mercè Correa 1,2
Author information
Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC4450094  NIHMSID: NIHMS418120  PMID: 23141060
The publisher's version of this article is available at Neuron
Summary

Nucleus accumbens dopamine is known to play a role in motivational processes, and dysfunctions of mesolimbic dopamine may contribute to motivational symptoms of depression and other disorders, as well as features of substance abuse. Although it has become traditional to label dopamine neurons as “reward” neurons, this is an over-generalization, and it is important to distinguish between aspects of motivation that are differentially affected by dopaminergic manipulations. For example, accumbens dopamine does not mediate primary food motivation or appetite, but is involved in appetitive and aversive motivational processes including behavioral activation, exertion of effort, approach behavior, sustained task engagement, Pavlovian processes and instrumental learning. In this review, we discuss the complex roles of dopamine in behavioral functions related to motivation.

Keywords: reinforcement, motivation, behavioral economics, reward, decision making, behavioral activation, aversion, depression, addiction

Nucleus accumbens dopamine (DA) has been implicated in several behavioral functions related to motivation. Yet, the specifics of this involvement are complex, and at times can be difficult to disentangle. An important consideration in interpreting these findings is the ability to distinguish between diverse aspects of motivational function that are differentially affected by dopaminergic manipulations. Although ventral tegmental neurons have traditionally been labeled “reward” neurons, and mesolimbic DA referred to as the “reward” system, this vague generalization is not matched by the specific findings that have been observed. The scientific meaning of the term “reward” is unclear, and its relation to concepts such as reinforcement and motivation is often ill defined. Pharmacological and DA depletion studies demonstrate that mesolimbic DA is critical for some aspects of motivational function, but of little or no importance for others. Some of the motivational functions of mesolimbic DA represent areas of overlap between aspects of motivation and features of motor control, which is consistent with the well known involvement of nucleus accumbens in locomotion and related processes. Furthermore, despite an enormous literature linking mesolimbic DA to aspects of aversive motivation and learning, a literature which goes back several decades (e.g., Salamone 1994), the established tendency has been to emphasize dopaminergic involvement in reward, pleasure, addiction, and reward-related learning, with less consideration of the involvement of mesolimbic DA in aversive processes. The present review will discuss the involvement of mesolimbic DA in diverse aspects of motivation, with an emphasis on experiments that interfere with DA transmission, particularly in nucleus accumbens.

Mesolimbic DA and Motivation: The Changing Theoretical Landscape

If nothing else, humans are inveterate story tellers; we are, after all, the descendants of people who sat around the fire at night being regaled by vivid myths, tales, and oral histories. Human memory is more efficacious if random facts or events can be woven into the meaningful tapestry of a coherent story. Scientists are no different. An effective university lecture, or a scientific seminar, is often referred to as “a good story”. So it is with scientific hypotheses and theories. Our brain seems to crave the order and coherence of thought offered by a simple and clear scientific hypothesis, backed up by just enough evidence to make it plausible. The problem is-- what if the coherence of the story is being enhanced by over interpreting some findings, and ignoring others? Gradually, the pieces of the puzzle that do not fit continue to eat away at the whole, eventually rendering the entire story woefully inadequate.

One can argue that this kind of evolution has taken place with regards to the DA hypothesis of “reward”. A “story” could be constructed, which would proceed as follows: the main symptom of depression is anhedonia, and since DA is a “reward transmitter” that mediates hedonic reactions, then depression is due to a reduction of DA-regulated experience of pleasure. Likewise, it has been suggested that drug addiction depends upon the experience of pleasure induced by drugs that hijack the brain’s “reward system”, which is mediated by DA transmission, and evolved to convey the pleasure produced by natural stimuli such as food. This would even suggest that blocking DA receptors could offer a readily effective treatment for addiction. Finally, one could also offer a “story” constructed on the premise that DA neurons exclusively respond to pleasurable stimuli such as food, and that this activity mediates the emotional response to these stimuli, which in turn underlies the appetite for food consumption. Such stories are not “straw men” that are artificially constructed for these passages. But unfortunately, despite their popularity, none of these ideas is fully supported by a close examination of the literature.

To take the example of dopaminergic involvement in depression, one could begin to deconstruct this idea by pointing out that “anhedonia” in depression is often misinterpreted or mislabeled by clinicians (Treadway and Zald, 2011). Several studies show that depressed people often have a relatively normal self-rated experience of encounters with pleasurable stimuli, and that, over and above any problems with the experience of pleasure, depressed people appear to have impairments in behavioral activation, reward seeking behavior and exertion of effort (Treadway and Zald, 2011). Indeed, most depressed people suffer from a crippling constellation of motivational impairments that include psychomotor retardation, anergia and fatigue (Demyttenaere et al., 2005; Salamone et al., 2006), and considerable evidence implicates DA in these symptoms (Salamone et al., 2006, 2007). These observations, coupled with the literature indicating that there is not a simple correspondence between DA activity and hedonic experience (e.g. Smith et al. 2011), and the studies linking DA to behavioral activation and exertion of effort (Salamone et al. 2007; see discussion below), lead one to conclude that dopaminergic involvement in depression seems to be more complicated than the simple story would have allowed.

Similarly, it is clear that a substantial body of research on drug dependence and addiction does not comply with the traditional tenets of the DA hypothesis of reward. Several studies have shown that blockade of DA receptors or inhibition of DA synthesis does not consistently blunt the self-reported euphoria or “high” induced by drugs of abuse (Gawin 1986; Brauer and DeWit, 1998; Nann-Vernotica et al. 2001; Wachtel et al. 2002; Leyton et al. 2005; Venugopalan et al. 2011). Recent research has identified individual differences in behavioral patterns shown by rats during Pavlovian approach conditioning, which are related to the propensity to self-administer drugs. Rats that show greater response to conditioned cues (sign-trackers) display different patterns of dopaminergic adaptation to training as compared to animals that are more responsive to the primary reinforcer (goal trackers; Flagel et al., 2007). Interestingly, the rats that show greater Pavlovian conditioned approach to an appetitive stimulus, and show greater incentive conditioning to drug cues, also tend to show greater fear in response to cues predicting shock, and greater contextual fear conditioning (Morrow et al., 2011). Additional research has challenged some long held views about the neural mechanisms underlying addiction, as opposed to the initial reinforcing characteristics of drugs. It has become more common to view addiction in terms of neostriatal habit-formation mechanisms built upon extensive drug taking, which can be relatively independent of instrumental reinforcement contingencies or the initial motivational characteristics of drug reinforcers (Kalivas, 2008; Belin et al., 2009). These emerging views about the neural basis of drug addiction, and its potential treatment, have moved well beyond the original story offered by the DA hypothesis of “reward”.

After decades of research, and continuing theoretical developments, there has been a substantial conceptual restructuring in the field of DA research. Considerable evidence indicates that interference with mesolimbic DA transmission leaves fundamental aspects of the motivational and hedonic response to food intact (Berridge 2007; Salamone et al. 2007). Behavioral measures such as progressive ratio break points and self-stimulation thresholds, which were once thought to be useful as markers of the “reward” or “hedonia” functions of DA, are now considered to reflect processes involving exertion of effort, perception of effort-related or opportunity costs, and decision making (Salamone, 2006; Hernandez et al., 2010). Several recent electrophysiology papers have demonstrated responsiveness of either presumed or identified ventral tegmental DA neurons to aversive stimuli (Anstrom and Woodward, 2005; Brischoux et al., 2009; Matsumoto and Hikosaka, 2009; Bromberg-Martin et al., 2010; Schulz, 2010; Lammel et al., 2011). Many investigators now emphasize the involvement of mesolimbic and nigrostriatal DA in reinforcement learning or habit formation (Wise 2004; Yin et al., 2008; Belin et al. 2009), rather than hedonia per se. These trends have all contributed to a dramatic rewriting of the story of dopaminergic involvement in motivation.

Motivational Processes: Historical and Conceptual Background

The term motivation refers to a construct that is widely used in psychology, psychiatry, and neuroscience. As is the case with many psychological concepts, the discussion of motivation had its origins in philosophy. In describing causal factors that control behavior, the German philosopher Schopenhauer (1999) discussed the concept of motivation in relation to the way that organisms must be in a position to “choose, seize, and even seek out the means of satisfaction”. Motivation also was a vital area of interest during the initial development of psychology. Early scientific psychologists, including Wundt and James, included motivation as a subject in their textbooks. Neobehaviorists such as Hull and Spence frequently employed motivational concepts such as incentive and drive. Young (1961) defined motivation as “the process of arousing actions, sustaining the activity in progress, and regulating the pattern of activity”. According to a more recent definition, motivation is “the set of processes through which organisms regulate the probability, proximity and availability of stimuli” (Salamone, 1992). Generally speaking, the modern psychological construct of motivation refers to the behaviorally-relevant processes that enable organisms to regulate both their external and internal environment (Salamone, 2010).

Perhaps the main utility of the construct of motivation is that it provides a convenient summary and organizational structure for observable features of behavior (Salamone, 2010). Behavior is directed towards or away from particular stimuli, as well as activities that involve interacting with those stimuli. Organisms seek access to some stimulus conditions (i.e., food, water, sex) and avoid others (i.e., pain, discomfort), in both active and passive ways. Moreover, motivated behavior typically takes place in phases (Figure 1). The terminal stage of motivated behavior, which reflects the direct interaction with the goal stimulus, is commonly referred to as the consummatory phase. The word “consummatory” (Craig, 1918), does not refer to “consumption”, but instead to “consummation”, which means “to complete” or “to finish”. In view of the fact that motivational stimuli usually are available at some physical or psychological distance from the organism, the only way to gain access to these stimuli is to engage in behavior that brings them closer, or makes their occurrence more likely. This phase of motivated behavior often is referred to as “appetitive”, “preparatory”, “instrumental”, “approach”, or “seeking”. Thus, researchers sometimes distinguish between “taking” vs. “seeking” of a natural stimulus such as food (e.g. Foltin et al. 2001), or of a drug reinforcer; indeed, the term “drug seeking behavior” has become a common phrase in the language of psychopharmacology. As discussed below, this set of distinctions (e.g. instrumental vs. consummatory or seeking vs. taking) is important for understanding the effects of dopaminergic manipulations on motivation for natural stimuli such as food.

Figure 1.

Open in a new tab

For several years, researchers have been making distinctions between aspects of motivated behavior, many of which are differentially affected by dopaminergic manipulations. Motivated behavior takes places in phases, in which the animal first must approach or seek the reinforcing goal stimulus (e.g. appetitive, instrumental, approach, preparatory or seeking behavior). Eventually, the organism gains access to the motivational stimulus, and directly interacts with it (consummatory or taking behavior). In addition, the distinction between activational (vigor, persistence, stimulation of sustained activity) and directional (i.e., behavior is directed towards or away from a particular stimulus) aspects of motivation has been made in the behavioral literature for many years. More recently, Berridge and colleagues have emphasized the distinction between liking (i.e., the hedonic reaction to the stimulus) and wanting (the desire for the stimulus, the tendency to consume or pursue the stimulus). These distinctions are highly relevant for characterizing the effects of DA antagonists and accumbens DA depletions on motivated behavior; several papers indicate that DA antagonism and accumbens DA depletions have a greater effect on appetitive, instrumental, preparatory or seeking behavior, as well as behavioral activation and “wanting”, while having less effect on consummatory behavior, directional aspects of motivation, and “liking”.

(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)