
Some of the most mesmerizing examples of collective behaviour of animal groups can be seen overhead every day. V-shaped formations of migrating geese, starlings dancing in the evening sky and hungry seagulls swarming over a fish market, are just some of the wide variety of shapes formed by bird flocks. Fish schools also come in many different shapes and sizes: stationary swarms; predator avoiding vacuoles and flash expansions; hourglasses and vortices; highly aligned cruising parabolas, herds and balls (Partridge 1982; Partridge et al. 1983; Parrish et al. 2002). These shapes are often seen on a scale that far exceeds the size or even the range of interaction of individual fish. Herring schools can consist of more than 5000 individuals spread over 700 m2 (Mackinson 1999).

Despite the variety of shapes and motions of animal groups it is possible that many of the different collective patterns are generated by small variations in the rules followed by individual group members. Several authors have developed computer simulation models, known as self-propelled particle (SPP) models, that attempt to capture the collective behaviour of animal groups in terms of the interactions between group members (Okubo 1986; Reynolds 1987; Gueron et al. 1996; Czirok & Vicsek 2000). For example, Couzin et al. (2002) proposed a model in which individual animals follow three simple rules of thumb: (i) move away from very nearby neighbours; (ii) adopt the same direction as those that are close by and (iii) avoid becoming isolated. Each individual thus has three zones—repulsion, alignment and attraction—which increase in size, so that individuals are attracted to neighbours over a larger range than they align, but decrease in priority, so that an individual would always move away from neighbours in the repulsion zone (figure 2a). Keeping the repulsion and attraction radii constant, Couzin et al. (2002) found that as the alignment radius increased, individuals would go from a loosely packed stationary swarm (figure 2b), to a torus where individuals circle round their centre of mass (figures 1a and 2c) and, finally, to a parallel group moving in a common direction (figure 2d). Far from requiring a distinct set of behaviours, these three very different collective patterns self-organize in response to a small adjustments to one factor: the radius over which individuals align with each other (Couzin & Krause 2003). Hoare et al. (2004) later used a similar model to explain the group size distribution they observed in laboratory experiments.

Figure 2.

Open in a new tab

Couzin et al. (2002) model of fish dynamics. (a) Illustration of the rules governing an individual in the fish model. The individual is centred at the origin: zor, zone of repulsion; zoo, zone of orientation; zoa, zone of attraction. The possible ‘blind volume’ behind an individual is also shown, α, field of perception. Collective behaviours exhibited by the model: (b) swarm, (c) torus and (d) dynamic parallel group.

If the complex patterns produced by animal groups can be explained in terms of a few simple rules, is it possible to use simulation models to predict and even control the behaviour of human crowds? Helbing et al. (2000) proposed a simulation model for pedestrians attempting to escape life-threatening situations through a limited number of exits. They assumed that, in such a situation pedestrians' behaviour is limited to following a few simple rules: try to minimize travel time, avoid collisions with walls and move in the direction of other people. Tragically, these natural behaviours are also those which lead to increased blockages and decreased probability of escape. Helbing et al. (2000) were also able to show that widening corridors could actually lead to slower collective motion, because pedestrians at the end of the widening slow down traffic by trying to squeeze back in to the main flow. Helbing's modelling approach has been usefully applied in understanding: why pedestrians walking on a busy street form bands moving in alternative directions (Milgram & Toch 1969; Helbing & Molnar 1995), the speed of Mexican waves in football stadiums (see figure 1e; Farkas et al. 2002, 2003); as well as the formation of traffic jams (Helbing & Huberman 1998; Helbing & Treiber 1998). These models, which treat humans as particles that interact according to a set of ‘social forces’, have been remarkably successful in predicting the shape and dynamics of crowds.

(c) Audience applause

After any good concert performance, audiences express their appreciation by a loud round of applause. In Eastern Europe and Scandinavia this applause is often rhythmical, with the entire audience clapping simultaneously and periodically. Neda et al. (2000a,b) recorded and analysed the clapping of theatre and opera audiences in Romania and Hungary and found a common pattern: first an initial phase of incoherent but loud clapping, followed by a relatively sudden jump into synchronized clapping that, after about half a minute, was again rapidly replaced by unsynchronized applause (figure 3a). A surprising observation was that the average volume of the synchronized clapping is lower than that of unsynchronized applause, both before and after the synchronized bouts. While an audience presumably wants to maximize their volume and thus their appreciation of the performance, they are unable to combine louder volumes with synchronized clapping.

Figure 3.

Open in a new tab

The emergence of synchronized clapping (from Neda et al. 2000a,b). (a) The average noise intensity of a crowd through time. The first 10 s shows unsynchronized fast clapping, followed by a change to regular slower clapping until around 27 s, followed by synchronized clapping again. (b) A normalized histogram of clapping frequencies for 73 high school students (isolated from each other) for Mode I (solid) and Mode II (dashed) clapping.