
**URL:** https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8406748/

---

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know
Search
Log in

Primary site navigation

Search PMC Full-Text Archive
Search in PMC
Journal List 
User Guide
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.
Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice
Front Hum Neurosci. 2021 Aug 12;15:635932. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.635932
The SEEKING Drive and Its Fixation: A Neuro-Psycho-Evolutionary Approach to the Pathology of Addiction
Antonio Alcaro 1,*, Anthony Brennan 2, David Conversi 1
Author information
Article notes
Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC8406748  PMID: 34475816
Abstract

Neuro-ethological studies conducted by Panksepp and his colleagues have provided an understanding of how the activity of the mesolimbic dopaminergic (ML DA) system leads to the emotional disposition to SEEK/Explore, which is involved in all appetitive motivated behavior and mental activity. In pathological addiction phenomena, this emotional disposition “fixes” itself on certain obsessive-compulsive habits, losing its versatility and its natural predisposition to spontaneous and unconditioned activation. Overall, the result is a consistent disinterest in everything that is not the object of addiction. From a neuro-psycho-evolutionary point of view, the predisposition to develop addictive behavior can be attributed to a loss of “functional autonomy” of the SEEKING/Explorative disposition. Indeed, as shown by animal and human studies, the tendency to be conditioned by situations and contexts that provide an immediate reward can be closely related to a deficit in the tonic endogenous activity of the ML DA-SEEKING system.

Keywords: SEEKING, dopamine, mesolimbic, addiction, compulsive, habit, exploration, drive

Introduction

According to the American Society of Medicine (American Society of Addiction Medicine, 2011), “Addiction is a treatable, chronic medical disease involving complex interactions among brain circuits, genetics, the environment, and an individual’s life experiences. People with addiction use substances or engage in behaviors that become compulsive and often continue despite harmful consequences.” The literature on this phenomenon is immense and reviewing that comprehensively is beyond the scope of this article, which is to conceptually analyze the potential contribution to the understanding of addiction of the neuro-psycho-evolutionary approach to the SEEKING drive and its fixation.

From a neuro-psycho-evolutionary perspective, SEEKING is a neurobiologically based and evolutionarily conserved emotional drive (Ikemoto and Panksepp, 1999; Alcaro et al., 2007; Alcaro and Panksepp, 2011). Such drive is thought to be involved in all the appetitively motivated behaviors and play an essential role in stimulating mental activity. Addiction can be conceptualized as the result of SEEKING becoming “fixated” upon compulsive habits, thereby losing its versatility and spontaneous activation to novelty, regardless of the presence of other reinforcements. This fixation results in a lack of interest in everything other than the target of addiction. Environments that provide plentiful and accessible conditioned rewards, while not stimulating unconditioned exploration toward novel and unpredictable settings, further exacerbated the loss of “functional autonomy” of the SEEKING drive.

Substance-related addictions, such as those to alcohol or drugs, almost always have clear and recognizable signs. Usually, the addicted tend to isolate themselves or restrict their acquaintances to a small circle of people with whom they share the same drug-related habits (McAlaney et al., 2021). Such social maladjustment often leads to marginalization and antisocial behavior (Fox et al., 2013). In contrast, non-substance-related forms of addiction, such as those to the Internet, food, gambling, sex, work, etc., are often more challenging to identify because they arise as common behaviors within everyday social contexts. They are more subtle and devious, and it can be complicated to determine whether you are dealing with addictive behavior (Alavi et al., 2012).

Consider, as a paradigmatic example, the following clinical sketch. A few weeks ago, a woman decided for the first time to consult a psychotherapist about a problem she was having with her 17-year-old daughter. The daughter had been behaving atypically for several months: she would lock herself in her room for hours, stay awake at night, and catch up on lost sleep after returning from school in the afternoon. Questioned by her mother, the girl claimed to spend all time in the room, in front of the computer or on her mobile phone, “chatting” with friends or browsing various social networks. Are we facing the symptoms of true Internet addiction, or can we consider the girl’s smartphone overuse in line with her lifespan and socio-cultural context without overemphasizing it?

Although dependent habits are widespread, we need to develop a better distinction between behaviors that resemble addiction but do not compromise the individual’s overall functioning and psychophysical health, and maladaptive, compulsive rituals, which require intervention. To this aim, it may be helpful to view addiction from an evolutionary perspective, using the contributions from comparative research on animal brains and behavior. Such studies have identified the mesolimbic DAergic system as the neural substrate fundamental to establishing and maintaining all forms of addiction (for review Kuhn et al., 2019). Over the years, a more extensive corticolimbic circuit model has been developed that now includes other brain regions involved in compulsion and decision-making processes (e.g., the orbitofrontal cortex). This extended model can better capture the often-stochastic transition toward compulsive use, integrating the genetic and epigenetic information underlying vulnerability to addiction (Volkow et al., 2019; Lüscher and Janak, 2021). However, the dopamine-mesolimbic motivation-reward-reinforcement cycle remains the most coherent physiological theory in addiction (Popescu et al., 2021). Abundant animal and human studies have shown that the predisposition to develop addictive behaviors can be closely related to a deficit in the endogenous tonic activity of the ML DA system (George et al., 1995; Marinelli and White, 2000; Chefer et al., 2003; Alcaro et al., 2007).

Interestingly, although the neurobiological processes responsible for the development and maintenance of dependent behaviors are common to both humans and many animal species, the phenomenon of pathological addiction only manifests itself under certain conditions where predisposing factors result in vulnerability, suggesting an interaction between biological and socio-cultural factors (Westermeyer, 1999).

Based on this premise, we propose a hypothesis that attempts to identify a psycho-biological substrate for individual vulnerability to the development of pathological addiction and connect such predisposition to specific environmental, cultural, and socio-economic factors that characterize our contemporary world.

The ML DA-SEEKING System

Studies of the neurobiological processes involved in the establishment of addictive behavior converge with the dominant role played by the ML DA system and its associated areas and circuits (Wise and Bozarth, 1987; Di Chiara and Imperato, 1988; White, 1996, but see Alcaro et al., 2007 for a summary on the subject). The activation of this system is indeed responsible for the behaviorally incentivizing effects of rewarding stimuli and influences learning, conditioning the incentive value attributed to the stimuli and behaviors associated with the process of reinforcement (classical conditioning and operant conditioning) (Robinson and Berridge, 2001, 2003, 2008; Salamone and Correa, 2002; Everitt and Robbins, 2005). Traditionally referred to as the “reward circuit” (Wise, 2002), the ML DA system, therefore, plays a fundamental role in acquiring compulsive habits and in the frequent reactivation of these habits by conditioned stimuli.

To explain this phenomenon, Robinson and Berridge proposed the incentive-sensitization theory more than 20 years ago (1993). According to this theory, repeated exposure to artificial reinforcers, such as drugs of abuse, sensitize the ML DA system to these reinforcers and to the associated conditioned stimuli, thereby enhancing their motivational value (Vanderschuren and Pierce, 2010). Subsequently, the frequent repetition of behaviors that have produced these reinforcements gradually shapes cognitive and motor procedural schemata, which in turn become actual compulsive habits (Robbins and Everitt, 1999).

Following a highly simplified sketch, we can hypothesize that the ML DA system acts as a link between the representation of specific stimuli and environmental contexts, associated with reinforcements by some limbic structures, such as the amygdala or hippocampus, and a series of procedural sequences (cognitive and motor) processed within the frontal cortico-subcortical circuits (see Alcaro et al., 2007 for a summary).

From a neuro-ethological perspective dealing with the unconditional factors that influence learning (Lorenz, 1965; Panksepp, 1998), we can understand how the ML DA system is the neurobiological substrate of a primary emotional drive known as the SEEKING/Exploration disposition. It is an intrinsic psycho-behavioral function of the brain that has evolved to make animals explore and seek all kinds of stimuli necessary for survival and reproduction (Ikemoto and Panksepp, 1999; Alcaro et al., 2007; Alcaro and Panksepp, 2011). To be precise, SEEKING is the instinctive basis for all motivated behavior in the appetitive phase (e.g., the search for distal stimuli) which anticipates the second phase of consumption (regarding proximal stimuli) (Wise and Bozarth, 1987; Berridge and Robinson, 1998; Salamone and Correa, 2012).

The SEEKING drive perspective connects with another enormous research fields: the one about intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivation (e.g., Santucci et al., 2019), which – in turn – relates to the information-SEEKING research topic (e.g., Horan et al., 2019). Although there are many interpretations about the roles of the ML DA system (e.g., Bromberg-Martin et al., 2010; FitzGerald et al., 2015; Schultz, 2015), the SEEKING drive theory has the advantage of subsuming all other functions within a single basic psycho-behavioral disposition (see Alcaro et al., 2007 for a review). From a behavioral perspective, the SEEKING disposition expresses itself as locomotion, sensory exploration, orientation reflexes, and approach movements. From a subjective point of view, however, this disposition is accompanied by feelings of enthusiasm, desire, interest, curiosity, and trust, as well as mental states of expectation that anticipate the existence of future rewards (Alcaro and Panksepp, 2011; Cruciani et al., 2011; Conversi et al., 2014).

From a neuro-psychoanalytical perspective, the ML DA system has been identified with the cerebral substrate of libido, considered not only as sexual energy but also as a source of outwardly directed energy investment (Kaplan-Solms and Solms, 2000; see Appendix A).

Remarkably, invertebrates also have a SEEKING/Exploration disposition, which is regulated by neurochemical processes like those of mammals. For example, the administration of cocaine and amphetamines, drugs that act directly on DA transmission, can influence the behavior of freshwater crayfish in very similar ways to that of mammals (Alcaro et al., 2011). Crayfishes are invertebrates that, in a familiar environment and without specific stimulation, spend most of their time in a state of complete inactivity. However, as soon as psychostimulants are administered into their circulatory system, they activate and begin exploring the surroundings as if it has suddenly become new and interesting. Activating effects even stronger arise by administering the psychostimulants directly into the ganglion of the head, the brain equivalent in vertebrates (Alcaro et al., 2011).

The results suggest that these animals are susceptible to the incentive effect of these drugs of abuse. Moreover, they prefer drug-associated environments and learn to act to obtain their administration (Søvik and Barron, 2013; Zhu et al., 2014; Engleman et al., 2016; Kaun and Rothenfluh, 2017; Huber et al., 2018). Thus, the addiction phenomenon seems to be rooted in psycho-neuro-behavioral functions that are very ancient from a phylogenetic perspective and are indeed related to the SEEKING/Exploration emotional disposition.

Directed vs. Undirected SEEKING

The SEEKING emotional disposition typically strives toward specific objects. When recruited by basic biological impulses, such as hunger, thirst, sexuality, the need to find shelter, etc., it promotes exploration to achieve a specific purpose, which coincides with a particular goal-object or environmental condition capable of satisfying the urge. SEEKING ceases when the organic conditions that led to the recruitment of the drive end.

While recruited by basic biological drives and conditioned by homeostatic-visceral regulatory mechanisms, the SEEKING/Exploration system retains some functional autonomy. Indeed, the electrical stimulation of the SEEKING/Exploration circuits activate motivated behaviors related to eating, drinking, or hunting, depending on the environmental contexts in which it is administered (Valenstein et al., 1969). Moreover, under conditions where reinforcing cues or stimuli are absent, the electrical stimulation produces generalized excitation and unspecific exploratory behaviors (Gallistel, 1974; Panksepp, 1998). Thus, unspecific exploration and appetitive motivation may be the purest expressions of SEEKING disposition (Ikemoto and Panksepp, 1999; Alcaro et al., 2007; Alcaro and Panksepp, 2011).

However, through learning, the autonomous expression of SEEKING can be narrowed down, restricting the boundaries of its operation, and directing exploration to specific objects and particular procedures. In this case, the activation of the SEEKING emotional disposition is channeled to a specific sequence of activities aimed at achieving a particular stimulus reinforcement (food) and stops when the environmental conditions that led to its activation are no longer present. For example, a rat that has learned to walk through a maze to obtain food will execute a particular sequence of movements along the tunnels of the experimental apparatus until reaching the goal. The learning process, both in terms of stimulus (classical conditioning) and behavior (operant conditioning), determines a gradual and progressive removal of the functionally autonomous component of the SEEKING/Exploration system, linked to the ventromedial cortico-striatal areas of the DA system and a greater recruitment of the dorsal-lateral regions of the same circuits (Everitt and Robbins, 2005; Alcaro et al., 2007). Through reiteration, this process leads to an increasingly automated execution of SEEKING-driven behavioral and mental activities, structuring them into complexes of habits that can occur with low consciousness and intentionality. In the next section, we will investigate the extent to which such habits could play a decisive role in addiction.

From Conditioning to Habits

The initial experimental research on addiction explained it as a neurochemical imbalance due to repeated drug use motivated to avoid withdrawal symptoms (Solomon, 1977). Over time, however, it has become increasingly clear that, while withdrawal symptoms disappear in a few weeks, addicts remain prone to “craving,” i.e., a hard-to-repress urge that drives them to act compulsive behaviors, triggered by drug-associated cues even after a long abstinence. Since then, research has increasingly focused on craving-induced relapse and its underlying mechanisms (Shaham et al., 2003; Hyman, 2005).

(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)